---
layout: post
title: "sed command"
date: 2018-05-24
categories: bash shell-programming
tags: sed
comments: true
---

* Do not remove this line (it will not be displayed)
{:toc}

# Introduction

`sed` is a Unix *stream editor*[^1] that performs basic text transformations on an input stream (a file or input from a pipeline). It can perform operations such as search and replace, insertion and deletion, and more, on individual lines of a file or a range of lines specified in the input. The results are then written to the output stream, which can be redirected to a file, to another command in a pipeline, or to the terminal.

[^1]: A "stream editor" is a type of text editor that operates on a stream of text data, rather than on an entire file. In the case of sed, the text stream is processed one line at a time, and the transformations are applied to each line as it is read. The transformed lines are then output to another stream, which can be redirected to a file, to another command in a pipeline, or to the terminal. The stream-based approach allows sed to be used for processing large amounts of data efficiently, as it does not need to load the entire file into memory.

The general syntax for sed command:

```bash
sed [options] 'command' input-file
```

- `options`: Optional flags that modify the behavior of the `sed` command. Some common options include `-n` for suppressing default output, `-e` for executing multiple commands, and `-i` for performing in-place editing of files.
- `command`: A single or a set of commands that specify the transformations to be applied to the input stream. Commands must be enclosed in single quotes (`''`) to prevent shell expansion.
- `input-file`: The input file or files to be processed by `sed`. If no file is specified, `sed` will read from the standard input stream.

For example, the following command will replace all occurrences of the word "apple" with "orange" in the file fruits.txt:

```bash
sed 's/apple/orange/g' fruits.txt
```

# Several commands that I used

* To edit file in place use option `-i`  with sed.

* Backup and edit input file in-place use option `-i.bkp` with sed.

* Replace a string in multiple files

    ```bash
    sed -i 's/foo/bar/g' *.dat
    ```

    This will replace word "foo" to "bar" in all \*.dat files present in PWD.

    ```bash
    sed -i 'Ns/foo/bar/g' *.dat
    ```

    Here N is the Nth line of the text file. This command will find "foo" in Nth line of text fine and replace with "bar". This is not going to check any other line except Nth line.

    To use **variables** in the sed command `use double quotes`

    ```bash
    sed -i "s/$var1/ZZ/g" "$file"
    ```

    Reference: [https://askubuntu.com/a/76842](https://askubuntu.com/a/76842)

* Replace several character from a string

    ```bash
    echo ramkrishna | sed 's/ram//g'
    ```

    or if want to replace several character from string, then

    ```bash
    echo "ram> krishna <Shar,ma" | sed 's/[<>,]//g'
    ```

    The above command will remove > or < or , from the string.

* Show first line number 1-20 in a text file

    ```bash
    sed -n 1,10p FileName.txt
    ```

* Append a line after text match

    ```bash
    sed '/<search-pattern>/a <Text-To-Append>' FileName.dat
    ```

* Append a line before text match

    ```bash
    sed '/<search-pattern>/i <Text-To-Append>' FileName.dat
    ```

    Example:

    ```bash
    $ cat test

    foo
    bar
    option
    baz
    ```

    ```bash
    sed '/option/a insert text here' test
    ```

    **Output**

    ```
    foo
    bar
    option
    insert text here
    baz
    ```
    Ref: https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/121161/how-to-insert-text-after-a-certain-string-in-a-file

* Remove line of text from multiple files

    ```sh
    sed '/line of text/d' *.txt
    ```

    If you want to edit in place use option `-i` (edit in place). Or if you want to keep backup of old file then use `-i.bak` flag. If not simply put it in a bash loop:

    ```sh
    for file in $(ls *.txt)
    do
        sed '/line of text/d' $file > $file.new_file.txt
    done
    ```

    Ref: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1182756/remove-line-of-text-from-multiple-files-in-linux

* Copy part of file to another file

    ```sh
    sed -n 16,80p file1 > new_file
    ```

* Add prefix/suffix to the begining of each line

  ```bash
  sed -i -e 's/^/prefix/' file1     # ^ stands for the begining of line
  sed -i 's/$/:80/' file.txt        # $ stands for the end of line
  ```
